ARIZONA BOARD OF REGENTS   
POLICY MANUAL  
1-118 Tribal Consultation  
Revision Dates  
9/27/2018, 2/5/2016, 12/ 4/2008 (adopted)  
 
Chapter I: General Provisions   Page 1 of 5 
Article A: General Provisions  
 A. Guiding Principles  
 
The board and the universities value and desire to develop their relationships 
with sovereign tribes. This policy reflects the board’s commitment to these 
important government -to-government relationships by recognizing and affirming 
fundamental principles of consultation and respect.  
 
1. The board recognizes and respects the authority of sovereign tribes and is 
committed to government -to-government relationships with individual 
sovereign tribes.  
 
2. The board and the universities respect and acknowledge th e culture, 
traditions, beliefs, governance processes, tribal laws, codes, regulations, 
and protocols of sovereign tribes. As such, the board and the universities 
are committed to complying with all applicable tribal laws, codes, and 
regulations.  
 
3. This p olicy sets forth the requirements and expectations for good faith 
consultation between the board and universities and tribal leaders and 
designated representatives.  
 
4. The expectations described in this policy are in support of, and not 
intended to limit, the many successful on -going relationships and 
collaborations between the board, the universities and tribes. The board 
encourages on -going communication with tribal le adership regarding this 
consultation policy as well as other issues of mutual interest, such as 
student success.  
 
B. Consultation  
 
1. Expected and required consultation  
 
a. The board and universities will communicate early, regularly, and in 
good faith wi th individual tribal governments regarding proposed 
research, initiatives, agreements, and policies that may have 
foreseeable implications for tribes and individuals as members of a 
tribe.  
 ARIZONA BOARD OF REGENTS  Effective: 9/27/2018  
Policy 1-118, Tribal Consultation   
 
Chapter I: General Provisions   Page 2 of 5 
Article A: General Provisions  
 b. The board acknowledges that laws that protect individual 
participants in research may not be sufficient to protect the interests 
of a sovereign tribe that could be affected by research.  
 
c. Universities and tribes will collaborate in the design of research in 
which they jointly choose to participate. Each party to t he joint 
research will consult with all other parties regarding confidentiality, 
ownership of data and results, use of land or other resources, 
ownership and disposition of any biological materials collected in 
the course of research, proposed changes in t he research, and 
proposed publications or presentations relating to the research. 
Each party will strive to communicate in a manner that is 
reasonably understandable by all parties.  
 
d. The following are examples of possible activities by universities 
unde r the governance of the Arizona Board of Regents with the 
potential for direct tribal implications that will require consultation 
under this policy:  
 
i. Any research supported or authorized by a university under 
the governance of the Arizona Board of Regents, that 
involves participation by members of a sovereign tribe and 
that may foreseeably result in research results with 
implications specific to a tribe or to individuals as members 
of a tribe, and the proposed publication or dissemination of 
that re search;  
 
ii. Any research involving human subjects, including genetic 
testing or testing of blood, tissue or other biological materials 
in which the individual’s membership in or affiliation with a 
tribe is identified, and that is intended to or that may 
foreseeably result in conclusions or generalizations about a 
tribe or individuals as members of a tribe;  
 
iii. Any research or other activity involving human remains, 
funerary objects, sacred objects, or objects of cultural 
patrimony that are subject to the  Native American Graves 
Protection and  Repatriation Act; 
 
iv. Any activity, including research, on land under the control or 
jurisdiction of a sovereign tribe;  
 
v. Any initiative, including educational programs, intended for 
students or employees who are members of or affiliated with 
federally recognized tribes; and  
 ARIZONA BOARD OF REGENTS  Effective: 9/27/2018  
Policy 1-118, Tribal Consultation   
 
Chapter I: General Provisions   Page 3 of 5 
Article A: General Provisions  
 vi. Any board or A rizona public university policy or initiative that 
may foreseeably affect a sovereign tribe in a manner 
different than the general public.  
 
2. Board and university tribal lia isons  
 
a. The board executive director  will serve as the tribal liaison for the 
board.   
 
b. Each university president will designate a tribal liaison for the 
university.  
 
3. Consultation Process  
 
a. If the board or a university plans to develop a policy or propose an 
initiative or practice that will affect any federally recognized tribe in 
Arizona, the board and university tribal liaison(s) will use their best 
efforts to share information and solicit input in advance about the 
proposed policy or initiative with the affected tribes. The universities 
may from time to time develop new programs and services or 
discontinue existing programs or services for Native American 
students, and will involve the univ ersity’s designated tribal liaisons 
to assist in communicating those changes.  
 
b. When consulting with or seeking consent from a sovereign tribe for 
purposes of research, land use or other agreements, university 
institutional review boards and contracting  departments must 
document proof of tribal consultation and approval in accordance 
with the applicable protocol or process of the tribe(s) involved. The 
university’s tribal liaison should be advised of the project and will 
assist in identifying the appropr iate leaders and approval protocols 
of the tribe(s).  
 
c. Consultation with pan -tribal or non -governmental organizations 
(e.g., the Intertribal Council of Arizona, the Arizona Commission on 
Indian Affairs, Urban Indian Centers, etc.) and committees (e.g., 
University Tribal Advisory Councils, etc.) Will be in coordination 
with, and not to the exclusion of, consultation with individual 
sovereign tribes.  
 
4. This policy is not intended to address matters such as tuition setting and 
other general issues that af fect tribal members or communities to the 
same extent as the general public.  
 
 
 ARIZONA BOARD OF REGENTS  Effective: 9/27/2018  
Policy 1-118, Tribal Consultation   
 
Chapter I: General Provisions   Page 4 of 5 
Article A: General Provisions  
 C. Education  
 
Each university will establish educational programs for university administrators, 
faculty, staff, and students regarding the requirements and expectations for tribal 
consultation and research.  
 
D. Resolution of issues and enforcement  
 
1. Any concerns related to tribal consultation should be brought to the 
attention of the appropriate university tribal liaison for assistance in 
resolving.  The tribal liaison will  coordinate with appropriate university 
personnel and use best efforts to work with the designated 
representative(s) of the tribe(s) and other affected individuals to reach a 
mutually acceptable resolution.  
 
2. If the tribal liaisons and designated repres entatives are not able to 
collaboratively develop a satisfactory and timely resolution, the university 
tribal liaison will inform the university president, who will offer to meet with 
the designated leadership of the tribe to continue to address the concer ns. 
The university president will include the board executive director  as 
appropriate.  
 
3. Upon learning of any allegations of violations of research protocols, 
research policies, land use or access agreements with a sovereign tribe, 
or laws or policies of  a sovereign tribe, the involved university personnel 
will promptly advise their university tribal liaison and university president. 
The university president or the president’s designee will assist in notifying 
the affected tribe.  
 
4. The board and univers ity will address allegations of violations of board or 
university rules by university employees or students through personnel 
policies, codes of conduct and policies on research compliance and 
integrity.  
 
5. Activities contemplated under this policy may a lso be subject to applicable 
tribal law, state and federal law, including codes, ordinances, research 
and other protocols and regulations.  
 
 
 
Policy History  
12/4/2008   Approved by the Board on second reading.  
2/5/2016  Policy revision approved by the Board  on second reading.  
9/27/2018  Policy was revised  to reflect “Executive Director” of the Board in place of ARIZONA BOARD OF REGENTS  Effective: 9/27/2018  
Policy 1-118, Tribal Consultation   
 
Chapter I: General Provisions   Page 5 of 5 
Article A: General Provisions  
 “President.”  
Related Information  
 